AS THE 21ST
CENTURY DAWNED,
THE LITERATURE THAT HAD
DEFINED LATIN AMERICAN
CULTURE AND IDENTITY
FOR HUNDREDS OF YEARS
APPROACHED YET ANOTHER
CRUCIAL JUNCTURE.
THE 20TH CENTURY HAD
BEEN A SPECTACULARLY
SUCCESSFUL PERIOD FOR
WRITERS FROM THE CONTINENT.
THE LATIN AMERICAN BOOM
- WHICH FEATURED WRITERS
SUCH AS JORGE LUIS
BORGES, JULIO CORTAZAR,
AND CARLOS FUENTES
- HAD LAUNCHED
LATIN AMERICA ONTO THE
WORLD LITERARY STAGE.
MAGICAL REALISM -
THE STYLE OR GENRE
IN WHICH FANTASTICAL
ELEMENTS APPEAR
IN AN OTHERWISE
REALISTIC SETTING -
BECAME A WILDLY POPULAR
TRANSCULTURAL MEME.
CRITICS AND READERS
FROM AROUND THE WORLD
STOOD UP AND TOOK NOTICE,
AS DID HOLLYWOOD STUDIOS,
WHICH TRANSFORMED MANY
WORKS OF THIS PERIOD
INTO FEATURE FILMS.
LITERATURE OF THE NEW
WORLD HAD A LONGSTANDING
TRADITION OF CONTRARINESS
AND VOLATILITY,
YET IN THE YEARS
AFTER THE BOOM
IT HAD BECOME
ALMOST PREDICTABLE,
A VICTIM OF ITS
OWN SUCCESS.
LATIN AMERICAN LITERATURE
BECAME NEARLY SYNONYMOUS
WITH THE AESTHETICS
OF MAGICAL REALISM
AND WITH ITS
MAIN PRACTITIONERS.
INNOVATION WAS REPLACED
WITH COMPLACENCY.
FOR THE FIRST TIME,
LATIN AMERICAN WRITERS
HAD TO WRESTLE WITH THE
CHALLENGES OF SUCCESS.
*
IT CAN BE CONFIDENTLY
STATED THAT COMPLACENCY
FLIES DIRECTLY IN THE
FACE OF LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE'S HISTORY,
A HISTORY THAT IS
OVERFLOWING WITH WRITERS
WHO CHALLENGED CONVENTION
AND DEFIED THE EASY
CLASSIFICATIONS OF GENRE.
AND EVEN AS THE
21ST CENTURY DAWNED,
MANY OF THE SAME WRITERS
WHO HAD FUELED THE BOOM
BECAME ADVOCATES FOR
NONCONFORMIST AUTHORS
WHO WERE DISENCHANTED
WITH THE STATUS QUO.
WHILE INTERNATIONALLY
RECOGNIZED LATIN
AMERICAN AUTHORS CONTINUE
WRITING TO THIS DAY
WITH GREAT SUCCESS
AND SKILL, THEY ALSO
SERVE AS BELLWETHERS
OF WHAT WILL COME.
THEY POINT THE WAY
TOWARDS LESSER-KNOWN
AUTHORS WHO ARE
WAITING IN THE WINGS.
THESE ESTABLISHED
WRITERS ARE, IN EFFECT,
PATRONS OF AN
ALTERNATIVE LITERATURE
- A LITERATURE
DEDICATED TO NARRATIVE
EXPERIMENTATION AND TO
RETHINKING LATIN AMERICA
AS A RIOTOUSLY
DIVERSE CONTINENT,
ONE MADE COHERENT BY SHARED
DREAMS AND NIGHTMARES.
SO, IN THE CLASSICALLY
PARADOXICAL FASHION
THAT DISTINGUISHES THE
WRITING OF SOUTH AMERICA,
RADICAL CHANGE COMES
ABOUT THROUGH THE AGENCY
OF AUTHORS WHO
ARE THEMSELVES
LEGITIMIZED AND
LIONIZED BY CRITICS,
ACADEMIA, AND THE
PUBLISHING MARKET.
WHO ARE THE WRITERS
THAT FORESHADOW
A NEW
NARRATIVE TREND?
THEY INCLUDE
NAMES SUCH AS
CESAR AIRA
AND RICARDO PIGLIA,
AND THE PLAYWRIGHT
GRISELDA GAMBARO.
IN MEXICO YOU FIND SERGIO
PITOL, MARGO GLANTZ,
MARIO BELLATIN
AND JUAN VILLORO;
IN COLOMBIA, FERNANDO
VALLEJO, ALONG WITH
OTHER AUTHORS BELONGING
TO THE SICARESCA GENRE.
WE FIND ROBERTO
BOLANO IN CHILE.
THERE ARE THE WRITERS KNOWN
AS THE "CRACK GENERATION"
- JORGE VOLPI OR
IGNACIO PADILLA.
MEMBERS OF THE
MCONDO GROUP,
INCLUDING ALBERTO
FUGUET IN CHILE;
RODRIGO FRESAN
IN ARGENTINA;
EDMUNDO PAZ
SOLDAN IN BOLIVIA;
AND JORDI SOLER
FROM MEXICO.
AND THERE
ARE THE POETS:
MAROSA DI
GIORGIO IN URUGUAY,
PEDRO LEMEBEL
IN CHILE,
AND MARCELO
COHEN IN ARGENTINA.
LIKE SO MANY GENERATIONS
OF WRITERS BEFORE THEM,
SEVERAL CONTEMPORARY
LATIN AMERICAN AUTHORS
HAVE PLUMBED THEIR LIFE
STORIES AS SOURCE MATERIAL
FOR THEIR NOVELS, PLAYS,
SHORT STORIES, AND POEMS.
THEY PLUNDERED THEIR OWN
PASTS TO PLOT OUT NEW
FICTIONAL DIRECTIONS IN
WHICH CREDIBILITY IS MORE
OF A LITERARY CLICHE THAN
A COMPOSITIONAL NECESSITY.
WRITERS SUCH AS FERNANDO
VALLEJO, ROBERTO BOLANO,
SERGIO PITOL,
MARIO BELLATIN,
AND CESAR AIRA FALL
INTO THIS CATEGORY.
THEY OFTEN INSERT
THEMSELVES AS CHARACTERS
IN THEIR TALES, AND THE
"I" THAT THEY ASSUME
OFFERS THE PERSPECTIVE OF
AN OMNIPRESENT SPECTER
- OPEN TO AND OBSERVING
ANY AND ALL EVENTS,
FROM TAME DOMESTIC AFFAIRS
TO RIOTOUS STREET SCENES.
ALTHOUGH SERGIO
PITOL BELONGS TO
THE SAME GENERATION
AS CARLOS FUENTES
AND ELENA
PONIATOWSKA,
RECOGNITION OF HIS
TALENTS CAME MUCH LATER.
HIS WORK STARTED TO BECOME
POPULAR IN THE LATE 80'S,
ESPECIALLY AMONG
YOUNG WRITERS.
DURING THE 80'S, PITOL
WAS A CULTIC WRITER;
IN THE 90'S HE WAS
STILL A CULTIC WRITER,
AND HE WAS
A REFINED WRITER.
AMERICAN YOUNG PEOPLE
HAVE ALWAYS ADORED HIM,
MAINLY BECAUSE OF WHAT
HE DID IN THE 80'S.
IT WAS EASIER TO ESTABLISH
CONNECTIONS IN THE 90'S,
AND THE MARKET RULES OF
THIS PERIOD WERE CLEARER.
THAT IS TO SAY, THE LOCAL
MARKET OF THIS DECADE WAS
A MATRIX OF MANY FACTORS;
ONE OF THEM WAS THE
ADVANCEMENT OF
TECHNOLOGY IN THE 90'S,
WHICH MEANT THAT
THERE WERE ONLY
A FEW PRINT RUNS
OF A PUBLICATION.
HE HAD BEEN AFFLICTED
WITH MALARIA
AND THEN ORPHANED
AT AN EARLY AGE,
LIVING WITH VARIOUS
GRANDPARENTS AND AUNTS
IN A TRANSIENT LIFE WHERE
BOOKS FORMED HIS REFUGE.
HE READ THE WORKS OF JULES
VERNE, WHO INSPIRED HIM
TO INTRODUCE FANTASY
INTO HIS OWN NOVELS.
IN TWO OF
HIS BOOKS,
PASSION FOR THE PLOT
AND THE ART OF FLIGHT,
HE INVESTIGATES THE STATE
OF MEXICAN CULTURE.
THE LAST CHAPTER
OF THE ART OF FLIGHT
RECOUNTS THE AUTHOR'S
TRIP TO THE TROUBLED
REGION OF CHIAPAS AND
PRESENTS A CONCILIATORY
VISION OF THE
CONFLICT THERE,
ONE FOUNDED ON THE
NECESSITY OF UNDERSTANDING
OPPOSING VIEWS AND OF THE
KALEIDOSCOPIC REALITY
OF THE MEXICAN
INDIANS' EXPERIENCE.
SOMETIMES, AFTER SEEING
PAINTINGS OF BECKMANN,
I HAVE FELT THE TEMPTATION
TO INCORPORATE INTO
MY STORIES SITUATIONS AND
CHARACTERS WHOSE SIMPLE
PROXIMITY COULD BE
CONSIDERED A SCANDAL;
TO ESTABLISH IN A RAPT
FIERCENESS THE THREADS
NECESSARY TO PUT INTO
MOTION ALL KINDS OF
INCOMPATIBLE INCIDENTS
UNTIL A PLOT IS CREATED.
TO DREAM ABOUT WRITING A
NOVEL FULL OF CONTRADICTIONS,
THE MAJORITY OF
THEM ONLY APPARENT;
TO CREATE,
HERE AND THERE,
DEEP SPOTS OF DARKNESS,
CRACKS, ABYSMAL DEPTHS.
NOTED FOR THEIR GREAT
NARRATIVE AGILITY,
SERGIO PITOL'S
WORKS CONTAIN
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ASIDES,
REFLECTIONS ON ART,
REPORTS ON
CURRENT EVENTS,
AND IMPRESSIONS
FROM HIS TRAVELS
AS A DIPLOMAT AND
CULTURAL ATTACHE.
HIS BEST-KNOWN
WORKS INCLUDE
THE SOUND OF A FLUTE,
FLOWER GAMES,
AND THE
MEPHISTO WALTZ.
THREE OF HIS NOVELS
WERE PUBLISHED TOGETHER
UNDER THE TITLE
CARNAVAL TRIPTYCH,
WITH A PROLOGUE BY
THE ITALIAN AUTHOR
ANTONIO TABUCCHI.
THE CHILEAN WRITER ROBERTO
BOLANO SHOOK THE CONTINENT
WITH FRANK AND
SHOCKING NOVELS.
ALTHOUGH HE IS OFTEN
LINKED WITH WRITERS
SUCH AS CESAR AIRA
OR RICARDO PIGLIA,
HIS PROGRAM CAN BE SEEN
AS GOING EVEN FURTHER,
DEEP INTO THE DARK CORE OF
LATIN AMERICAN HISTORY.
HIS ITINERANT LIFE
ALLOWED HIM TO EXPERIENCE
THE CONTINENT FIRST HAND,
WHILE HIS NATIVE CHILE
GROANED UNDER THE
REPRESSIVE DICTATORSHIP
OF AUGUSTO PINOCHET.
IN 1973 HE JOINED
THE RESISTANCE
AND ENDED
UP IN PRISON.
HE THEN WENT INTO
EXILE IN EL SALVADOR
BEFORE MOVING TO
EUROPE IN 1977,
WHERE HE TOOK ON A
VARIETY OF JOBS,
EKING OUT AN EXISTENCE BY
WINNING LITERARY CONTESTS.
IN THE LATE 90'S HE BEGAN
PUBLISHING AT A FURIOUS PACE.
IT WAS AT THIS TIME
THAT HIS SEMINAL WORK,
THE SAVAGE DETECTIVES,
WAS RELEASED.
THIS IS HIS BEST KNOWN
NOVEL, OFTEN COMPARED TO
JULIO CORTAZAR'S BRILLIANT
AND INFLUENTIAL NOVEL
HOPSCOTCH.
BOTH OFFER HIGHLY
FRAGMENTED NARRATIVES.
IN THE SAVAGE DETECTIVES,
EACH INDIVIDUAL SCENE
SHIFTS TO A DIFFERENT
REGISTER - BE IT A
CRONICA, AUTOBIOGRAPHY,
OR ABSURDISM -
CREATING A KALEIDOSCOPIC
EXPERIENCE
OF DIVERSITY AND
INTERCONNECTION.
WHAT APPEARS TO BE AN
ARTISTIC FLIGHT OF FANCY
IS IN FACT AN
EXISTENTIAL GAMBIT.
BOLANO IS ANOTHER WRITER
THAT HAS EXPERIENCED
SEVERAL
DETECTIVE FORMS.
I THINK OF THE
SAVAGE DETECTIVES
THAT HAS A PERFECTLY
BORGIAN STYLE,
WHICH COULD BE THE NAZI
LITERATURE IN AMERICA.
BOLANO IS A
RECREATIONAL WRITER.
I THINK OF THE LONG NOVELS
WHERE HE MAKES FUN OF
THE AVANT-GARDES, OF THE
LITERARY LEGACY AND,
AT THE SAME TIME, HE IS A
DEFINITE METICULOUS WRITER
REGARDING THE CONTROL OF
PROSE AS IN THE RESPECT,
THE DESIRE TO RESPECT
ONE'S ANCESTORS IN THE
LATIN AMERICAN
LITERARY TRADITION.
BOLANO INSERTS
HISTORICAL FIGURES
AND CONTEMPORARY
WRITERS INTO HIS PLOT,
ALONG WITH HIS ALTER EGO,
ARTURO BELANO.
BELANO AND HIS PARTNER,
ULISES LIMA,
ARE THE FEARSOME
DETECTIVES OF THE TITLE,
AND THEY SET OUT TO SEARCH
FOR CESAREA TINAJERO -
A MYSTERIOUS WRITER WHO
DISAPPEARED IN MEXICO
IN THE YEARS IMMEDIATELY
AFTER THE REVOLUTION.
THE INVESTIGATION GOES
ON FOR TWENTY YEARS,
FROM 1976 TO 1996.
CLARA CABEZA, PARQUE
HUNDIDO, MEXICO DF,
OCTOBER OF 1995.
I WAS THE SECRETARY
OF OCTAVIO PAZ.
YOU CANNOT IMAGINE
THE WORK THAT I HAD.
TO WRITE LETTERS, TO
LOCATE UNAVAILABLE
MANUSCRIPTS, TO PHONE
THE COLLABORATORS
AT THE MAGAZINE, TO
OBTAIN BOOKS THAT WERE
ONLY IN ONE OR TWO
AMERICAN UNIVERSITIES.
AFTER TWO YEARS OF
WORKING FOR DON OCTAVIO,
I ALREADY HAD A CHRONIC
HEADACHE THAT ATTACKED ME
AT 11:00 AM AND IT DID
NOT GO AWAY, EVEN THOUGH
I TOOK PAINKILLERS,
UNTIL 6:00 PM.
DISTANT STAR WAS BOLANO'S
FIFTH NOVEL, ONE THAT
DWELLS ON A VERY DIFFERENT
KIND OF INVESTIGATION.
HERE, HE IS IN SEARCH
OF ANOTHER CHARISMATIC
CHARACTER SHROUDED BY
THE MISTS OF LEGEND.
THE MAN IS CARLOS WIEDER,
AN AVIATOR AND SELF-STYLED
POET WHO ACQUIRES A
DUBIOUS CELEBRITY BY
SKYWRITING THREATENING
PROCLAMATIONS FROM HIS
AIRPLANE IN THE AIRSPACE
ABOVE SANTIAGO DE CHILE.
HE ALSO HAS A
STASH OF PHOTOS
HE TOOK OF THE VICTIMS
TORTURED AND EXECUTED
DURING PINOCHET'S COUP.
BOLANO'S INTELLIGENT
AND IRONIC STYLE IS
A GAME OF MIRRORS
BETWEEN TRUTH AND MYTH,
REALITY AND ILLUSION,
FACTS AND CONJECTURES,
APOCRYPHAL AND
HISTORICAL CHARACTERS.
IN THE NOVEL BY NIGHT IN
CHILE, HIS MAIN CHARACTER
IS SEBASTIAN URRUTIA
LACROIX, A PRIEST,
MIDDLING POET, AND
LITERARY CRITIC
WHO REVIEWS THE CRUCIAL
JUNCTURES OF HIS LIFE
DURING A NIGHT OF
FEVER-INDUCED DELIRIUM.
THE WORK CONSISTS
OF A SINGLE,
SUSTAINED MONOLOGUE
IN WHICH CHARACTERS
RANGING FROM
PABLO NERUDA
TO THE GERMAN NOVELIST,
ERNST JUNGER, APPEAR.
EVEN PINOCHET HIMSELF
MAKES AN APPEARANCE.
BOLANO'S NOVEL ENTITLED
NAZI LITERATURE IN AMERICA
IS COMPOSED OF BRIEF
DESCRIPTIONS OF THE LIVES
AND WORKS OF
NAZI AUTHORS
WHO LIVED ON THE
AMERICAN CONTINENT -
AUTHORS WHO, INCIDENTALLY,
NEVER EXISTED.
BUT IT IS HIS
EPIC NOVEL, 2666,
PUBLISHED AFTER
THE AUTHOR'S DEATH
AT THE AGE OF 50, THAT
SECURES BOLANO'S POSITION
IN THE PANTHEON
OF MODERN WRITERS.
ORIGINALLY CONCEIVED AS
FIVE SEPARATE NOVELS,
2666 BEGINS WITH THE
HUNT FOR A GERMAN WRITER
WHO HAS DISAPPEARED.
IT VEERS INTO THE STORY OF
A SERIAL KILLER WHO PREYS
ON FEMALE FACTORY WORKERS
IN A MEXICAN BORDER TOWN.
THE YEAR IN THE TITLE IS
THE VANISHING POINT FOR
HISTORY, A DISCIPLINE
THAT BOLANO DEFINES AS,
"SIMPLE WHORE, WHO HAS
NO DETERMINING MOMENTS,
BUT RATHER IS A
PROLIFERATION OF INSTANTS,
OF BREVITIES THAT
COMPETE WITH ONE ANOTHER
IN THEIR MONSTROSITY".
THE FIRST TIME THAT
JEAN-CLAUDE PELLETIER
READ BENNO VON ARCHIMBOLDI
WAS CHRISTMAS OF 1980,
IN PARIS, WHERE HE WAS
STUDYING GERMAN LITERATURE
AT THE UNIVERSITY, AT
THE AGE OF NINETEEN.
THE BOOK WAS
D' ARSONVAL.
YOUNG PELLETIER
IGNORED THE FACT
THAT THE NOVEL WAS
PART OF A TRILOGY
(COMPOSED OF THE GARDEN,
ABOUT THE ENGLISH;
THE LEATHER MASK,
ABOUT THE POLISH;
AND D' ARSONVAL WHICH WAS
EVIDENTLY ABOUT THE FRENCH),
BUT THAT IGNORANCE
OR THAT EMPTINESS
OR THAT BIBLIOGRAPHICAL
CARELESSNESS
- ONLY ATTRIBUTED TO
HIS EXTREME YOUTH -
DID NOT REDUCE THE
GLARE OF ADMIRATION
THE NOVEL
PRODUCED IN HIM.
THE ARGENTINEAN WRITER
CESAR AIRA'S STYLE
IS FAST-PACED AND
FORWARD-LEANING,
DEVOURING GENRES AND STYLES
WITH VORACIOUS EASE.
AIRA IS AN ADVOCATE
OF IMPROVISATION
AND OF EXUBERANT
NARRATIVE ENERGY,
ALWAYS MOVING THE
STORY FORWARD,
NEVER LANGUISHING IN
EDDIES OF SPECULATION.
MANY OF HIS STORIES HAVE A
FEELING OF INCOMPLETENESS,
A RESULT OF AIRA'S DELIGHT
IN CONFOUNDING STANDARD
EXPECTATIONS OF HOW
A NOVEL SHOULD END.
INFLUENCED BY FRENCH
WRITERS AND PHILOSOPHERS,
HE HAS REINVIGORATED
ARGENTINEAN LITERATURE
WITH AN AGILE AND
LUXURIANT PROSE
WHICH HE PUTS IN THE
SERVICE OF PLOTS
THAT REVEL IN
THE UNEXPECTED.
AIRA HAS DONE SOMETHING
REALLY POSITIVE.
WITH HIM, THE RIGHT TO BE
LESS SERIOUS IS RECLAIMED.
CERTAIN KINDS OF
LITERATURE OF THE 70'S
WERE CHARACTERIZED
BY SOLEMNITY,
AND I THINK THAT
WAS A MISTAKE.
IT LED TO A SENSE
OF EXCESSIVE TRUST
THAT ART COULD MAKE
SENSE, THAT IT COULD
LEAD TO COMPROMISE
AND CHANGE THE WORLD.
AIRA HAS NOT ENJOYED
WIDESPREAD PUBLIC
RECOGNITION, AND
EARLY IN HIS CAREER
HAD TO SELF-PUBLISH
HIS WORKS.
AN AVID FAN OF THE
ECCENTRIC, HIS LITERARY
CRITICISM INCLUDES
A MONOLITHIC STUDY
OF THE ENGLISH LIMERICK
AND NONSENSE WRITER
EDWARD LEAR.
CURRENTLY HE PUBLISHES
AT A FURIOUS PACE,
PRODUCING TWO TO FOUR
NOVELLAS A YEAR.
HIS EDITOR SANDRA
CONTRERAS SAYS OF AIRA,
"HE NOT ONLY
PRODUCES IN EXCESS,
BUT HE ALSO TRANSMUTES
TIME INTO VELOCITY
AND VIGILANCE
INTO HASTE.
THE QUESTION, IN THIS
SENSE, IS NOT THAT AIRA
PRODUCES A LOT, BUT THAT
AIRA PUBLISHES IT ALL,
INDISCRIMINATELY:
THE GOOD NOVEL
AND ALSO THE
BAD ONES".
AMONG AIRA'S MORE POIGNANT
WORKS ARE THE TEST,
IN WHICH THREE TEENAGERS,
TWO OF WHOM ARE LESBIANS,
ROB A SUPERMARKET;
AND THE WEEPING,
AN EXTENDED MONOLOGUE
THAT IS SIMULTANEOUSLY
HILARIOUS
AND DESPAIRING.
I WAKE UP WITH THE FIRST
LIGHTS OF THE DAWN,
AFTER A NIGHT OF
DEBILITATING INSOMNIA
AND PHANTASMAGORIA.
I AM SO TIRED,
SO CONFUSED.
I GIVE UP. I
CANNOT GO ON.
ALL THE SHADED PATHS
TAKE ME TO THE ATROCIOUS
CERTAINTY THAT IT
HAS HAPPENED TO ME
WHAT I
FEARED THE MOST.
AND THE WORST THING IS NOT
KNOWING IF IT IS CERTAIN,
IF IT HAS PASSED OR THERE
IS SOMETHING COMING,
ITS CAUSES,
ITS EFFECTS.
EVERYTHING IS LOOSE,
FLOATING, UNCONNECTED.
MANY OF AIRA'S MOST
CHARACTERISTIC PIECES,
SUCH AS EMA THE CAPTIVE,
THE BAPTISM, THE PHANTOMS,
AND THE HARE REINTERPRET
THE GAUCHO TRADITION
GIVING IT A
POST-MODERN VIEWPOINT.
AIRA DELIGHTS IN
DISLOCATING HISTORY
TO REARRANGE
IT IN A FRAMEWORK
OF EXTREME
SUBJECTIVITY.
HIS TECHNIQUE
IS TO TREAT
THAT WHICH IS
CLOSE AT HAND
SO AS TO MAKE IT
ALIEN, AND VICE VERSA;
IN THIS WAY, EVERYTHING
BECOMES NARRATABLE.
HE REFRAMES CONFLICTS
IN HIGH SCHOOLS IN
THE WAR OF
THE GYMNASIUMS.
HE TAKES HIS
NEIGHBORHOOD
- THE FLORES BARRIO
IN BUENOS AIRES -
AND REINTERPRETS
THE ROUGH-AND-TUMBLE
LIFE OF THE STREETS
IN FLORES NIGHTS.
HE ALSO SETS THE
OUTLANDISH ADVENTURES
OF THE DREAM IN
THE FLORES BARRIO.
HIS RELATIONSHIP
WITH LITERATURE
IS MORE HEDONISTIC
THAN PROFESSIONAL;
HE EARNS HIS LIVING
AS A TRANSLATOR
AND SPENDS MUCH
OF HIS TIME READING.
HE IS AS WELL RESPECTED
FOR HIS LITERARY CRITICISM
AS HE IS FOR HIS PROSE,
HAVING COMPOSED INCISIVE
MONOGRAPHS ON THE
NOVELIST ROBERTO ARLT,
THE CARTOONIST COPI,
AND THE POET
ALEJANDRA PIZARNIK.
AIRA IS A SPECIALIST
IN LITERARY REALISM.
HE WANTS TO PUT THE LIMITS
OF REALISM TO THE TEST,
WHAT CAN BE SHOWN AND UP
TO WHICH POINT WE DO NEED
COLLABORATION FROM
THE CREDULOUS READER
TO ACCEPT
THESE STORIES.
WE REALLY FEEL THAT
AIRA'S NOVELS DO NOT
EVER ACTUALLY COME
TO COMPLETION,
AS THEY GO
ON AND ON.
AND THERE IS AN END,
AN ABRUPT ONE, AND THEN
WE SAY THAT WE HAVE
NOVELS THAT DISOBEY
THE CONVENTIONS OF
THE TRADITIONAL NOVEL.
RECENTLY I TURNED
FIFTY, AND I HAD GREAT
EXPECTATIONS ABOUT THE
DATE, NOT AS MUCH FOR THE
BALANCE OF WHAT I LIVED
AS FOR THE RENOVATION,
THE NEW BEGINNING,
THE CHANGE OF HABITS.
IN FACT, I DID NOT
THINK FOR A MOMENT
ABOUT EVALUATING THE
HALF OF CENTURY LIVED.
I HAD MY PERSPECTIVE
FIXED ON THE FUTURE.
AIRA'S AESTHETIC
OF THE "CONTINUUM" -
A CONSTANT MOVEMENT FORWARD
IN FICTIONAL NARRATIVE
- CAN ALSO BE SEEN
IN THE WRITING STYLE
OF MARIO BELLATIN.
BELLATIN PUBLISHED
HIS FIRST NOVELS -
SALT WOMEN, GREENHOUSE
EFFECT, AND BEAUTY SALON
- WHILE LIVING IN PERU.
HE EMIGRATED TO MEXICO
WHERE HE PRESENTLY HEADS
THE ESCUELA DINAMICA,
A LABORATORY FOR THE
DEVELOPMENT OF
PROFESSIONAL WRITERS.
BELLATIN IS CONSIDERED
TO BE ONE OF THE MAJOR
SURPRISES OF CONTEMPORARY
LITERATURE, A WRITER WHO
HAS RETURNED THE
NOVEL TO PROMINENCE.
HIS WORKS ARE IMBUED
WITH AN UNREAL
AND ALLEGORICAL
TEMPERAMENT.
ANTHROPOLOGY SHOULD
BE FOUNDED ON
BELLATIN'S NOVELS.
AS NARRATIVE MACHINES,
THEY ARE AMAZING.
I MYSELF FEEL THAT THERE
IS NOT A GENERAL PROBLEM.
ONE MAY SAY THAT A
PARTICULAR NOVEL OF
BELLATIN'S WAS A GOOD ONE,
BUT HIS OUTPUT WAS HUGE.
LESSONS FOR A DEAD HARE
IS A NOVEL IN WHICH
ONE GOES DOWN AND
UP MANY LEVELS
AND THERE ARE STORIES
WITHIN OTHER STORIES
AND ONE MAY FEEL THAT
SOMETHING HAPPENED
BUT DOES NOT REALIZE
EXACTLY WHAT.
BUT YOU REALIZE YOU'RE IN
A PLACE AND DO NOT REALLY
KNOW EXACTLY WHERE,
IN A FORMAL SENSE.
HE IS ALSO
A WRITER CAPABLE OF
MASSIVE COMPREHENSIVE
NARRATIVES,
A WRITER OF A PARTICULAR
DRYNESS DURING THE 90'S.
BELLATIN
INTEGRATES PICTURES
INTO HIS NARRATIVES,
WEAVING A COLLAGE
OF WORD AND IMAGE
THAT CONJURES AN
EXTREME EXPERIENCE
OF EVERYDAY REALITY.
HIS PROSE IS COLD, ALMOST
OBJECTIVE, DISPELLING ANY
SUGGESTION OF SENTIMENT
OR DELIGHT IN CRUELTY.
HE PICKS AT VIOLENT,
RAW, AND EXPOSED TOPICS
AS THOUGH THEY
WERE SCABS.
IN THE SCHOOL OF
HUMAN PAIN OF SICHUAN,
BELLATIN EXPLORES
THE VARIOUS FORMS
OF HUMAN SUFFERING,
OFFERING A HORRIFIC
COMPENDIUM OF MALICE.
THE AUTHOR REFERS TO HIS
CHAPTERS AS "SMALL PLAYS",
AND GRANTS EACH SET
PIECE ITS AUTONOMY WHILE
SIMULTANEOUSLY INTEGRATING
IT INTO A NARRATIVE WHOLE.
IF SOMEBODY COULD
SEE ME RIGHT NOW,
IF SOMEONE COULD
ENJOY MY BODY
AS PEOPLE OF THE MOST
DIVERSE ORIGINS DO,
THEY COULD NOT
FIGURE OUT THAT
I HAVE NOT RECEIVED
ANY EDUCATION.
MORE THAN ONE WOULD THINK
THAT THE MARKS IN MY SKIN
OR IN MY NAILS,
SOMEWHAT BURNED,
ARE OTHER RESOURCES
USED IN THESE LANDS
TO EXTEND THE
SENSATIONS OF PLEASURE
TO UNBEARABLE EXTREMES.
BELLATIN'S
NOVEL FLOWERS
IS ALSO COMPOSED OF
NARRATIVE FRAGMENTS.
THE AUTHOR SAYS THAT, "THE
INITIAL INTENT IS THAT
EACH CHAPTER MIGHT
BE READ SEPARATELY,
AS IF IT WERE ABOUT THE
CONTEMPLATION OF A FLOWER".
EACH OF THE NOVEL'S
35 CHAPTERS
BEARS THE NAME OF
A DIFFERENT FLOWER.
OFTENTIMES BELLATIN
REFRAINS FROM ASSIGNING
A SPECIFIC PLACE OR
TIMEFRAME TO HIS STORIES.
THIS PINTERESQUE
STRATEGY LENDS A DRY,
DISTANT TONE TO
HIS WRITING,
WHICH SERVES AS A
CONTRASTING BACKGROUND
TO THE HORRIFYING
DETAILS OF HIS STORIES.
IN HIS NOVEL, SHIKI
NAGAOKA, A NOSE OF FICTION,
THE PROTAGONIST
SUFFERS FROM A DISFIGURING
CONGENITAL DEFORMITY; IT'S
ALMOST AS IF BELLATIN
WERE SEEKING IN THE
MALFORMED HUMAN FIGURE
THE ROOT CAUSE FOR THE
PROFOUND WRONGNESS
WE DETECT IN
THIS WORLD.
ANOTHER OF BELLATIN'S
NOVELS, DOG HEROES,
HAS A SUBTITLE THAT READS:
"ESSAY ON THE FUTURE
OF LATIN AMERICA SEEN
THROUGH AN IMMOBILE MAN
AND HIS THIRTY BELGIAN
MALINOIS DOGS".
BELLATIN'S WORKS ALWAYS
HAVE THIS IDEA THAT
A DEFORMITY
IS A PROBLEM,
WHAT COMES FROM
NOWHERE GOES NOWHERE.
THIS IS A CONDITION,
AT THIS POINT IT HAS
NO SENSE, AND
IT IS FORMATIVE.
BELLATIN'S CHARACTERS
DO NOT THINK BADLY
OF DEFORMITY - THEY
ALREADY HAVE IT.
HIS NOVELS FUNCTION
ACCORDING TO
THIS APPROACH TO
PROCESSING EXPERIENCE.
THE COLOMBIAN, FERNANDO
VALLEJO, IS ANOTHER
EXPATRIATE BASED IN
MEXICO, AND PERHAPS THE
MOST IMPORTANT WRITER
FROM THAT COUNTRY.
VALLEJO BELONGS TO
THE NON-CONFORMIST
INTELLECTUAL
TRADITION OF ANTIOQUIA
- A DEPARTMENT IN THE
NORTHWEST OF COLOMBIA.
THIS GROUP INCLUDES
WRITERS SUCH AS
FERNANDO GONZALEZ AND THE
NADAIST GONZALO ARANGO.
THE NATURALNESS
OF VALLEJO'S ROUGH
AND VIGOROUS PROSE HAS
MUCH IN COMMON WITH
AUTHORS SUCH AS GENET,
HENRY MILLER,
OR THE FRENCH
AUTHOR BORIS VIAN.
HE TRANSFORMED HIS
INFANCY AND ADOLESCENCE
INTO LITERATURE IN NOVELS
SUCH AS THE BLUE DAYS,
AND THEN THE
SECRET FIRE.
HE CHOOSES WORDS BOTH FOR
THEIR TRUTHFULNESS AND
FOR THEIR FINE EDGE AS HE
HACKS HIS WAY THROUGH THE
SOCIAL THICKET, EXPOSING
THE VIOLENT SIDE-EFFECTS
OF NARCOTICS TRAFFICKING
IN HIS COUNTRY.
HIS NOVEL THE HENCHMEN'S
VIRGIN WAS MADE INTO
A MOVIE, AND WAS
RELEASED IN THE U.S.
AS "OUR LADY OF
THE ASSASSINS".
IT IS A HALLUCINATORY TALE
SET IN VALLEJO'S HOME TOWN
OF MEDELLIN, A CENTER
OF DRUG TRAFFICKING
AND RAMPANT EXCESSES
DURING THE 1990'S.
THE BOOK TAKES THE
FORM OF A SINGLE,
UNCHAPTERED
MONOLOGUE.
THE NARRATOR IS A GAY
MAN WHO CLAIMS TO BE
A GRAMMARIAN
BY PROFESSION.
I THINK THAT THE
HENCHMEN'S VIRGIN
IS A GREAT BOOK.
IT IS REMARKABLE BECAUSE
OF FERNANDO VALLEJO'S
LANGUAGE, WHICH SOMETIMES
MAKES A PACT WITH INSULT.
IT IS A LANGUAGE OF
IRRITATION, OUTRAGE,
DISSATISFACTION
AND GRIEF.
I THINK THAT HE MAKES
POETRY OF AN UNPLEASANT
REALITY, BUT HE DOES NOT
MAKE IT ROMANTIC AT ALL.
ALTHOUGH THE
HENCHMEN'S VIRGIN
WAS A CRITICAL AND
COMMERCIAL SUCCESS,
VALLEJO DID NOT
REST ON HIS LAURELS.
HE CONTINUED
HITTING LOW AND HARD
WITH THE EDGE OF
THE ABYSS FROM 2001,
A NOVEL THAT TOOK AIM
AT TWO OF THE MOST
REVERED INSTITUTIONS
IN COLOMBIA -
CHURCH AND FAMILY.
WHEN CARLOS LEFT I
APPROACHED THE BED,
I SAT AT HIS SIDE AND
I LEANED OVER HIM:
HIS IMPLORING
EYES REACHED MINE.
WHAT DID HE MEAN?
HE WANTED ME TO
HELP HIM TO LIVE?
OR TO HELP
HIM TO DIE?
TO LIVE, BY ALL MEANS,
HE NEVER WANTED TO DIE.
LIKE MANY OTHER
CONTEMPORARY WRITERS,
VALLEJO IS NOT LEERY OF
INJECTING HIS OWN LIFE
INTO THE
STORIES HE TELLS.
THE RIVER OF TIME, BILLED
AS AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY,
IS A COLLECTION
OF SHORT PIECES THAT
BLURS THE LINE BETWEEN
PERSONAL HISTORY AND NOVEL,
BLENDING MEMOIRS
AND REFLECTIONS,
THE PAST AND THE PRESENT,
REALITY AND HALLUCINATION.
AND IN MY
BROTHER THE MAYOR,
VALLEJO TURNS TO ANOTHER
MEMBER OF HIS FAMILY,
HIS BROTHER CARLOS, WHO
SERVED FOR THREE YEARS
AS MAYOR OF TAMESIS, A
REMOTE MOUNTAIN TOWN.
IN MY BROTHER
THE MAYOR
VALLEJO DETAILS THE
ABSURDITY INHERENT
IN THE TRADITIONAL
MECHANISMS OF POWER.
HIS ACID PROSE OFFERS
A FEROCIOUS SATIRE
OF THE HUMAN DESIRE FOR
ORDERLINESS AND COHESION.
SAYS CRITIC
JUAN VILLORO:
"HIS IMPRECATORY HARANGUES
FALL ON COLOMBIA
LIKE ACID RAIN, A
VIOLENT TEMPEST,
A CATACLYSM OF
THE LANGUAGE".
IN ARGENTINA, THE
ECONOMIC CRISIS OF 2001
DEVASTATED THE
MIDDLE CLASS.
AS A RESULT, A NEW
CATEGORY OF CLASSLESS
AND EXCLUDED
PEOPLE WAS FORMED.
WITH THIS SOCIAL
PHENOMENON THERE AROSE
A GENERALIZED SENSE
OF ECONOMIC, SOCIAL,
AND CULTURAL IMPOTENCE.
DRUG ADDICTION
BECAME WIDESPREAD,
STANDARD SOCIAL
MODELS DISSOLVED,
AND THERE AROSE A
DESPERATE NEED
FOR AN ALTERNATIVE
AND INDEPENDENT
MEANS OF EXPRESSION.
THUS WAS BORN
CHABON LITERATURE,
A NEW SPECIES
OF FICTION THAT
GIVES VOICE TO THE
RECENTLY DISENFRANCHISED.
IN THE LANGUAGE OF THE
STREET, "CHABON" IS A
SLANG TERM THAT GUYS USE
TO REFER TO EACH OTHER.
AN EXAMPLE OF THIS SPECIES
OF WRITER IS THE POET
AND PUBLISHER SANTIAGO
VEGA, WHO WRITES
UNDER THE PSEUDONYM
WASHINGTON CUCURTO.
CUCURTO IS THE AUTHOR
OF COSA DE NEGROS,
A NOVEL WHOSE
MARGINALIZED CHARACTERS
OF DIVERSE BACKGROUNDS
INVESTIGATE ISSUES
OF RACE AND RENEW
THE DISCUSSION ABOUT
THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN
HIGH AND LOW CULTURE.
THE LATE 20TH CENTURY
MOVEMENT TOWARDS REALISM
HAS BEEN MARKED BY A
RETURN TO THE USE OF
THE FIRST PERSON.
IN CONTEMPORARY LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE
THE FIRST PERSON
CAN BE ALTERNATINGLY
- AND SOMETIMES
SIMULTANEOUSLY -
CONFESSIONAL AND
IMPETUOUS IN TONE.
THE "I" OF THE NARRATIVE
STANDS OUTSIDE THE ACTION,
FREE TO SUBJECTIVIZE
AN INCREASINGLY COMPLEX
AND INTERCONNECTED WORLD.
AS A RESULT, OBSERVED
REALITY BECOMES SUFFUSED
WITH AN INTENSELY
PERSONAL VISION -
THAT OF THE AUTHOR,
BY MEANS OF LANGUAGE
THAT CROSSES OVER GENRES
AND INVOKES IMAGES
CO-OPTED FROM A
MEDIA-SATURATED CULTURE.
THE INFLUENCE OF WRITERS
SUCH AS MANUEL PUIG,
SEVERO SARDUY,
ALFREDO
BRYCE ECHENIQUE,
AND CABRERA INFANTE HAS
PROVIDED LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE WITH A WISE
HUMOR, ONE THAT TRANSFORMS
STANDARD DOMESTIC DIALOGUE
INTO A KIND OF CINEMA.
ONE CAN SEE THESE
INFLUENCES IN
PEDRO LEMEBEL
IN CHILE,
MARGO GLANTZ
IN MEXICO,
LAURA RESTREPO
IN COLOMBIA,
MAROSA DI GIORGIO
IN URUGUAY,
OR ALAN PAULS
IN ARGENTINA.
IN THE 1990'S, TWO
IMPORTANT LATIN AMERICAN
LITERARY TRENDS
CONVERGED:
THE CRACK GENERATION
AND MCONDO.
THE CRACK GENERATION WAS
A MOVEMENT THAT BEGAN
IN MEXICO, FUELED BY
WRITERS SEEKING TO
LIBERATE THEMSELVES
FROM THE OBLIGATION TO
REPORT ON THEIR MESTIZO
OR REVOLUTIONARY PAST.
THEY NO LONGER WANTED
TO WRITE ABOUT
TOWNS INHABITED BY GHOSTS,
TO WRITE EXOTIC TALES
ABOUT THE CACIQUES
OR HEADMEN,
ABOUT WORK IN
GRIM FACTORIES
OR WHETHER OR NOT TO
SLIP ACROSS THE BORDER.
THE TERM "CRACK
GENERATION", THEN,
REFERS NOT TO THE
COCAINE-BASED DRUG
BUT RATHER TO THE
PROCESS OF RUPTURE,
OF MAKING A CLEAN
BREAK FROM THE PAST.
THESE ARE YOUNG WRITERS
WHO WERE TRYING TO
SWEEP CLEAN THE
FOUNDATIONS
OF THE MEXICAN
LITERARY SCENE.
THEIR QUEST BEGAN
IN THE SUMMER OF 1996,
WHEN A MINOR LITERARY
JOURNAL PUBLISHED
A MANIFESTO SIGNED BY
FIVE YOUNG WRITERS:
IGNACIO PADILLA,
JORGE VOLPI, ELOY URROZ
AND RICARDO
CHAVEZ CASTANEDA.
THE MANIFESTO WAS A PLEA
TO LEAVE WHAT THEY CALLED
"BANANA" LITERATURE
BEHIND, AND TO RETURN
TO THE ROOTS OF THE
LATIN AMERICAN BOOM:
AN INTIMATE BOND WITH
AN INTELLIGENT READER.
BY 2001, THE MEMBERS
OF THE CRACK GENERATION
HAD ACHIEVED INTERNATIONAL
RECOGNITION.
THEIR BOOKS WERE
COMMERCIAL SUCCESSES,
AND THEIR WRITING APPEARED
IN SUCH MAINSTREAM VENUES
AS EL PAIS, EL UNIVERSAL,
AND EL HERALD.
"CRACK" REFERS TO
A GROUP OF NOVELS
AND NOT OF
INDIVIDUALS,
NOVELS WHICH WERE
PRESENTED WITH
THEIR OWN MANIFESTO OR
ANTI-MANIFESTO IN 1996.
TEN YEARS AGO IT WAS
FORMED BY FIVE NOVELS
FROM FIVE WRITERS:
JORGE VOLPI, ELOY URROZ,
PEDRO ANGEL PALOU,
VICENTE HERRASTI,
RICARDO
CHAVEZ CASTANEDA
AND ME:
IGNACIO PADILLA.
THESE NOVELS WERE
PRESENTED BY A GROUP
OF WRITERS WHO
HAD MANY INTERESTS
BUT WHO ALSO WANTED
TO MAKE A JOKE.
IN THE CRACK MANIFESTO
THEY HAD CALLED FOR THE
RESURRECTION OF WHAT THE
CRITIC JOHN BRUSHWOOD
HAD TERMED THE
"PROFOUND NOVEL" -
BOOKS THAT MADE DEMANDS
UPON THE READER,
AND REQUIRED THEIR
ACTIVE PARTICIPATION.
THEY CITED
NOVELS SUCH AS
THE MUNDANE DAYS
BY JOSE REVUELTAS,
FARABEUF BY
SALVADOR ELIZONDO,
OR THE DEATH OF ARTEMIO
CRUZ BY CARLOS FUENTES.
THE MANIFESTO
MAKES CLEAR
THE CRACK WRITER'S
RESPONSIBILITY:
TO CARE FOR THE
INTELLIGENT READER
AND TO BREAK THE
TENDENCY OF THE
PUBLISHING MARKET TO
ENCUMBER LITERATURE
WITH DECEIT, TRICKS,
AND INGENUES,
THE CYNICALLY SUPERFICIAL
AND DISHONEST NOVEL.
FOR THE CRACK
NOVEL, THUS,
THE LANGUAGE MUST BE
RENEWED WITHIN ITSELF
- THAT IS, FEEDING IT
ITS MOST ANCIENT ASHES.
THE FIRST
OFFERINGS FROM THE
CRACK MOVEMENT WERE
TITLES SUCH AS
MELANCHOLY TEMPERAMENT
BY JORGE VOLPI,
IF YOUR MAJESTIES WERE TO
RETURN BY IGNACIO PADILLA,
THE IDIOT CONSPIRACY
BY RICARDO CHAVEZ,
AND LAS REMORAS
BY ELOY URROZ.
THESE NOVELS HAD LITTLE
IMPACT OUTSIDE OF MEXICO.
HOWEVER, IN 1999,
JORGE VOLPI WON THE
PRESTIGIOUS SPANISH
LITERARY PRIZE,
THE PREMIO BIBLIOTECA
BREVE DE SEIX BARRAL,
FOR HIS WORK ENTITLED
IN SEARCH OF KLINGSOR.
THE NOVEL COMMINGLES
METAPHYSICS WITH
REFLECTIONS ON THE ETHICS
OF SCIENCE AND POWER.
THE STORY FOLLOWS AN
AMERICAN PHYSICIST
AND A GERMAN MATHEMATICIAN
WHO ARE ON A QUEST
TO UNCOVER INFORMATION
ABOUT KLINGSOR,
A NAZI OFFICER WHO
ORDERED JEWS TO BE KILLED
IN THE NAME
OF SCIENCE.
ENOUGH LIGHT!
HIS ACID AND AGED WORDS
MAKE THE WORLD COME BACK,
FOR A MOMENT, TO THE
COLD AGE OF DARKNESS.
THE SPACE THAT SURROUNDS
HIM IS LIKE A DROP OF
CHINESE INK WHERE SHADOW
IS ACCENTUATED BY SILENCE:
FOR AN INSTANT,
NOBODY APPLAUDS HIM,
NOBODY DECEIVES HIM,
NOBODY INSULTS HIM.
EVEN THE CLOCKS,
OBEDIENT, SHUT UP.
DEATH, HE IS
SURE OF IT,
IS NOT GOING TO
BE VERY DIFFERENT.
ONLY WHEN THE ECHO OF
HIS OWN VOICE DISPERSES,
HE REALIZES HE IS THE
INHABITANT OF A COSMOS
THAT NO LONGER
BELONGS TO HIM.
COMPARED TO THE
CRACK MOVEMENT,
THE MCONDO WRITERS
ARE MORE DISPERSED,
MORE PROLIFIC,
AND LESS DOGMATIC.
MCONDO ARTISTS CAN BE
FOUND IN LITERATURE,
MUSIC AND FILM, FEEDING
ON WHAT THEY CALL
"BASTARD CULTURE",
WHERE HYBRIDISM IS A
SOURCE OF RICHNESS.
THE NAME "MCONDO"
IS A PLAY ON WORDS:
IT MOCKS MAGICAL
REALISM BY WAY OF
GABRIEL GARCIA
MARQUEZ'S FAMOUS
IMAGINARY VILLAGE
NAMED MACONDO.
ALBERTO FUGUET, THE WRITER
WHO COINED THE TERM,
EXPLAINED THAT:
"MY OWN WORLD IS
SOMETHING MUCH CLOSER TO
WHAT I CALL 'MCONDO' -
A WORLD OF MCDONALD'S,
MACINTOSHES AND CONDOS".
THE OVERARCHING INTENT
OF MCONDO AUTHORS IS
NOTHING LESS THAN TO
ANSWER THE GREAT QUESTION
OF LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE - "WHO ARE WE?"
- THOUGH THE LENS OF
PERSONAL IDENTITY -
"WHO AM I?"
IT IS IMPORTANT TO TAKE
INTO ACCOUNT THAT THE
CRACK MANIFESTO PRESENTED
IN 1996 CAME OUT AT
EXACTLY THE SAME TIME AS
THE MCONDO ANTHOLOGY,
A SERIES OF LATIN AMERICAN
WRITERS, ALSO MEXICAN,
WHO HAVE NO RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE CRACK MEMBERS.
THESE WRITERS ALSO
PLEADED FOR AN END
TO THE MYTH OF
MAGICAL REALISM,
FOR A RETURN TO THE GREAT
LITERATURE OF THE BOOM,
A RETURN TO THE ORIGINAL
BORGES AND TO THE WHOLE
LATIN AMERICAN
TRADITION OF CERVANTES.
CLEARLY, HOWEVER, THE
PERSONAL VISIONS OF MCONDO
ARE MANIFESTED IN WILDLY
DISSIMILAR STYLES.
ALBERTO FUGUET
IS FASCINATED BY
CROSS REFERENCES BETWEEN
THE POPULAR CULTURES
OF THE UNITED STATES
AND CHILE, HIS HOME.
A DIRECTOR OF FEATURE
FILMS AS WELL AS A WRITER,
HIS NOVEL BAD VIBES AND
HIS TALES FROM THE VOLUME
OVERDOSE OFFER A CINEMATIC
VERSION OF EVERYDAY LIFE,
RECOUNTED IN
COLLOQUIAL LANGUAGE.
HIS WORK THE MOVIES OF
MY LIFE CHRONICLES A
YOUNG MAN'S FASCINATION
WITH AMERICAN FILMS LIKE
"WILLY WONKA AND THE
CHOCOLATE FACTORY",
"CLOSE ENCOUNTERS
OF THE THIRD KIND",
"EARTHQUAKE!",
AND "LOGAN'S RUN".
HIS CINEMATIC MEMOIRS
SERVE AS A MEDIUM
FOR RETELLING
THE HISTORY OF
HIS HIGHLY
DYSFUNCTIONAL FAMILY.
I AM IN THE SAND,
KNOCKED DOWN,
CRACKS, GLUED
BY THE HUMIDITY,
WITHOUT STRENGTH TO
THROW ME TO THE SEA
AND TO FLOAT FOR A WHILE
UNTIL DISAPPEARING.
I AM BORED, FED UP: EVEN
THINKING EXHAUSTS ME.
FOR THE LAST HOUR, MY
ONLY DISTRACTION HAS BEEN
TO FEEL THE RAYS OF THE
SUN DRILLING MY EYELIDS,
VOODOO NEEDLES THAT
SOME "EX" PINS ME WITH
FROM HAITI OR JAMAICA,
THAT'S WHAT A WHORE SHE IS.
THE ARGENTINEAN
AUTHOR RODRIGO FRESAN
DEMONSTRATES A WIDE RANGE
OF INFLUENCES IN HIS NOVELS
THE LIVES OF SAINTS
AND THE SPEED OF THINGS.
HIS NOVELS HAVE BEEN
DESCRIBED AS REMINISCENT
OF THE BRILLIANT
EXPERIMENTAL NOVELIST
JULIO CORTAZAR,
F. SCOTT FITZGERALD,
JOHN CHEEVER, AND
KURT VONNEGUT.
MCONDO IS AN ANTHOLOGY,
IT WAS MAINLY THAT.
WITHIN THAT ANTHOLOGY,
I THINK MCONDO WAS THE
PROLOGUE OF THE
ANTHOLOGY WRITTEN BY
ALBERTO FUGUET AND
BY SERGIO GOMEZ,
MORE THAN THE SHORT
STORIES THEMSELVES.
THE BOLIVIAN
EDMUNDO PAZ SOLDAN
FOLLOWS A
DIFFERENT PATH,
MORE ANALOGOUS
TO THE WORK OF
JORGE LUIS BORGES,
WILLIAM FAULKNER,
THE URUGUAYAN
JUAN CARLOS ONETTI,
OR TO THE FUTURIST
ROBERTO BOLANO.
HIS SOCIAL NOVELS
CONFOUND EXPECTATIONS,
AND ARE SET
AGAINST A BACKDROP
OF ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
PROTESTS.
HIS WORKS INHABIT A
TERRITORY SOMEWHERE BETWEEN
THRILLERS AND ASTUTE
SOCIOLOGICAL NARRATIVES.
IN HIS NOVEL DIGITAL
DREAMS, HE INCORPORATES
THE SOCIAL IMPACT
OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES
INTO HIS FICTION.
AND, IN BOOKS LIKE
THE MATTER OF DESIRE,
IMPERFECT LOVES, AND
IN THE TALES FROM THE
COLLECTION ENTITLED
SIMULACRA, HE EXPLORES
THE LANGUAGE OF INTIMACY
IN ARCH SOCIAL DYNAMICS.
THE MATTER OF DESIRE TELLS
THE STORY OF AN AFFAIR
BETWEEN A LATIN AMERICAN
POLITICAL-SCIENCE
PROFESSOR AND ONE OF
HIS GRADUATE STUDENTS.
IT EXPLORES THEMES OF
DISLOCATION AND YEARNING -
FOR INTIMACY BUT ALSO FOR
HOME, A PLACE THAT WILL
NEVER BE THE SAME ONCE
IT HAS BEEN LEFT BEHIND.
WITH THE DAWN OF
A NEW CENTURY,
WOMEN WRITERS
HAVE EXPLODED ONTO
THE LATIN AMERICAN
LITERARY SCENE.
SOME AUTHORS INTERWEAVE
POLITICAL EVENTS
WITH EXPERIMENTAL
NARRATIVES AND FORMS.
OTHERS EXPLORE
THE EXPERIENCE
OF THE PRESENT IN
THEIR WRITINGS,
EXPLORING THE PHYSICAL
ROLE OF THE BODY
IN FULLY REALIZED
FEMALE CHARACTERS.
DESPITE THE MANY STYLISTIC
DIFFERENCES AMONG THEM,
THE INFLUENCE OF SEMINAL
WRITERS SUCH AS THE
MAGICAL REALIST LUISA
VALENZUELA IS UNDENIABLE.
SHE IS THE AUTHOR
OF ESSAYS SUCH AS
DARK DESIRES
AND THE OTHERS,
AND HIGHLY PRAISED STORIES
LIKE CHANGE OF ARMS
AND AS IN WAR, A WORK
IN WHICH VICTIMS AND
EXECUTIONERS ARE
INEXTRICABLY INTERCONNECTED,
WITHOUT KNOWING
WHERE THE FAULT,
HATRED, OR
DESIRE BEGINS.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
HERE YOU HAVE A STORY
THAT DOES NOT GET
TO MAKE HISTORY;
SOMEBODY WHO DOES
NOT EVEN GET A FACE,
BECAUSE, WHAT CAN ONE
KNOW OF HER OWN FACE?
A FLEETING GLANCE BEFORE
THE MIRROR, TO WATCH AND
UN-RECOGNIZE YOURSELF, TO
TRY TO SAIL ALL WATERS IN
SEARCH OF THE SAME THING
THAT ABSOLUTELY DOES NOT
MEAN TO FIND YOURSELF
IN THE REFLECTIONS.
DIAMELA ELTIT OF
CHILE UTILIZES DENSE,
WORKED-OUT PROSE THAT IS
AS POETIC AS IT IS OMINOUS
TO NARRATE THE EXPERIENCE
OF THE MARGINALIZED,
DOWNTRODDEN, AND
OUT-AND-OUT UNLUCKY.
SHE EXAMINES THE
STRUCTURES OF OPPRESSION,
THE BARRIERS
TO INTIMACY,
AND THE ABUSES OF POWER
THAT AFFLICT WOMEN.
IN HER NOVELS MANUAL LABOR
AND THE FOURTH WORLD,
PAIN AND LUST
APPEAR INSEPARABLE.
THE COLOMBIAN WRITER LAURA
RESTREPO HAS MANAGED TO
ACHIEVE GREAT POPULARITY
WHILE AT THE SAME TIME
KEEPING HER
SINGULAR SLANT.
ACTIVE IN LEFTIST POLITICS
FROM AN EARLY AGE,
HER EXPERIENCE ACTING
AS MEDIATOR BETWEEN THE
GUERRILLA GROUP M-19 AND
THE COLOMBIAN GOVERNMENT
SERVED AS A SPRINGBOARD
FOR HER LITERARY CAREER.
HER FIRST BOOK,
STORY OF A FASCINATION,
GIVES AN ACCOUNT
OF THE FAILURE OF
THESE TWO GROUPS
TO COME TO TERMS,
AND LED TO HER SELF-IMPOSED
EXILE IN SPAIN AND MEXICO.
SHE RECEIVED
THE PRESTIGIOUS
ALFAGUARA AWARD IN 2004
FOR HER NOVEL DELIRIUM.
THE MEXICAN
AUTHOR MARGO GLANTZ
HAS HAD A LONG CAREER AS
A DISTINGUISHED NOVELIST,
CRITIC, JOURNALIST
AND TRANSLATOR.
THE CHILD OF AN IMMIGRANT
FAMILY FROM THE UKRAINE,
HER RICH,
NUANCED EVOCATION
OF STATES OF
MIND AND EMOTION
HAS CAUSED HER
TO BE REGARDED AS
ONE OF MEXICO'S LEADING
LITERARY FIGURES.
HER METICULOUS STORIES
SEEK THE CAUSE
OF DISCONTENT
IN SMALL DETAILS,
AND UNCOVER THE
HUMOR THAT LIES
AT THE HEART OF
THE HUMAN EXPERIENCE.
WORDS FOR A FABLE:
"HOW TO DEFINE WITH WORDS
FEELINGS AND
THE AFFECTIONS?
THAT IS
VERY DIFFICULT,
IT SEEMS TO ME
BEYOND ALL DOUBT.
ALSO, DOESN'T
THE POET SAY THAT
WORDS SCREAM
LIKE WHORES?
AND WHEN THEY SCREAM
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO
MAKE THEM SAY WHAT
ONE MEANS AND I,
NO MATTER HOW HARD I TRY,
DO NOT GET TO THINK
ABOUT COMMON OR SIMPLY
HUMBLE THINGS AND
I ALWAYS TRY TO FEEL FUCKING
GOOD AND NOT TO SCREAM,
BUT AT THE MOMENT IN
WHICH I WRITE THESE WORDS
MY COMPUTER GIVES
THE REASON TO HIM,
TO THE POET,
BECAUSE SHE BLUSHES
AND UNDERLINES IN
RED THE BAD WORDS -
THOSE WHORES THAT ARE
ALWAYS SCREAMING".
AS LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE BLAZES A PATH
INTO THE 21ST CENTURY,
IT CONTINUES A COMPLEX
INTERACTION WITH HISTORY
THAT HAS BEEN ONGOING
SINCE BEFORE THE
TIME OF THE CONQUEST.
THE RECENT PAST
UNDOUBTEDLY WEIGHS HEAVY
ON THE MINDS OF
YOUNG WRITERS -
THE HUGE COMMERCIAL
IMPACT OF THE BOOM
AND THE AESTHETIC TRIUMPH
OF MAGICAL REALISM,
THE TOWERING FIGURE
OF JORGE LUIS BORGES,
THE EROTICISM
OF PABLO NERUDA,
WORKS SUCH AS ROBERTO ARLT'S
BRILLIANT THE ANGRY TOY,
JULIO CORTAZAR'S DAZZLING
EXPERIMENTAL NOVEL HOPSCOTCH,
AND ONE HUNDRED
YEARS OF SOLITUDE
BY GABRIEL
GARCIA MARQUEZ.
YET CONTEMPORARY WRITERS
SUCH AS WASHINGTON CUCURTO
AND EDMUNDO PAZ SOLDAN
WILL CONTINUE TO REINVENT
LITERATURE WHILE WRITING
IN A TRADITION THAT
REACHES BACK TO THE
POPOL VUH OF THE QUICHES
AND THE BOOKS OF
THE CHILAM BALAM.
THE WRITERS BEING BORN
TODAY IN QUITO, IN CUBA,
OR IN BUENOS AIRES WILL
WRITE IN A TRADITION THAT
INCLUDES FRAY BERNARDINO
DE SAHAGUN AND HIS
GENERAL HISTORY OF THE
THINGS OF NEW SPAIN
AND ESTEBAN ECHEVERRIA'S
SHORT STORY
THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE.
IN THIS DIALOGUE BETWEEN
THE FUTURE AND THE PAST
YOU CAN HEAR THE DISTINCT
STRAINS OF GAUCHO POETRY
SUCH AS MARTIN FIERRO, THE
EPIC POEM BY JOSE HERNANDEZ;
OR THE EVERYDAY RHYTHMS
OF COSTUMBRISMO,
A GENRE THAT
CAPTURED THE NUANCES
OF EVERYDAY
MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.
THE LITERATURE OF TODAY
PROCEEDS IN A DELICATE
DANCE WITH THE MODERNISMO
OF RUBEN DARIO
AND HIS SEMINAL
BOOK OF POEMS, AZUL,
AND WITH SHORT PROSE
PIECES THAT DWELL IN THE
REALM OF THE DAY-TO-DAY,
KNOWN AS CRONICAS.
THIS DYNAMIC IS INFORMED
BY MOVEMENTS LIKE
REGIONALISM,
INDIGENIST NARRATIVES,
AND THE "NOVELAS
DE LA TIERRA".
IT IS A TRADITION SHAPED
BY THE ZEST OF THE
REVOLUTIONARY NOVEL
AND THE VALOR OF THE
HISTORICAL NOVEL, SUCH
AS NATANIEL AGUIRRE'S
MASTERPIECE
JUAN DE LA ROSA:
MEMOIRS OF THE LAST SOLDIER
OF THE INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT.
AND, IT IS A LITERATURE
WRITTEN IN AN IDIOM
DEFINED BY THE
BRILLIANT POLEMICS OF
DOMINGO FAUSTINO SARMIENTO,
BY THE INFUSION OF
QUECHUA LANGUAGE AND
SYNTAX FROM THE WORKS OF
JOSE MARIA ARGUEDAS,
AND BY THE INFLECTIONS
OF "POESIA NEGRA",
WHICH SYNTHESIZED
BLACK AND WHITE CULTURE
TO DESCRIBE THE
JOYS AND THE AGONY
OF THE AFRICAN
EXPERIENCE IN AMERICA.
IN AN ENVIRONMENT WHERE
WRITING ONE'S MIND
HAS LED TO
PERSECUTION, EXILE,
AND EVEN ASSASSINATION,
THE STAKES FOR
CONTEMPORARY WRITERS FROM
LATIN AMERICA ARE HIGH,
JUST AS THEY WERE FOR
THEIR PREDECESSORS.
WHILE IT'S TOO EARLY
TO PREDICT THE FUTURE,
THE PRESENT CULTURAL
COORDINATES POINT TO
AN ONGOING FASCINATION
WITH IDENTITY, EVEN AS
LATIN AMERICA GRAPPLES
WITH GLOBALIZATION,
AND WITH NEW FORMS
OF SUBJECTIVITY
AND MIXED NARRATIVE
TECHNIQUES THAT CONTINUE
TO STRETCH THE BOUNDARIES
OF WORLD LITERATURE.
*